Thing 1

What they tell us: Markets need to be free.

why? When the government interferes to dictate what market participants can or cannot do, resources cannot flow to 
their most efficient use. Hence, if people cannot do the things that they find most profitable, they lose the 
incentive to invest and innovate.

What they don’t tell you: The free market doesn’t exist. Every market has some rules and boundaries that restrict 
freedom of choice. A market looks free only because we so unconditionally accept its underlying restrictions that we
fail to see them.

How ‘free’ a market is cannot be objectively defined. It is a political definition. The usual claim by free-market 
economists that they are trying to defend the market from politically motivated interference by the government is 
false. Government is always involved and those free-marketeers are as politically motivated as anyone. 

Example:

Labour ought to be free: In 1819 new legislation to regulate child labour, the Cotton Factories Regulation Act, was 
tabled in the British Parliament. The proposed regulation was incredibly ‘light touch’ by modern standards. It would
ban the employment of young children – that is, those under the age of nine. Older children (aged between ten and 
sixteen) would still be allowed to work, but with their working hours restricted to twelve per day. The new rules 
applied only to cotton factories, which were recognized to be exceptionally hazardous to workers’ health.

The proposal caused huge controversy. Opponents saw it as undermining the sanctity of freedom of contract and thus 
destroying the very foundation of the free market. In debating this legislation, some members of the House of Lords 
objected to it on the grounds that ‘labour ought to be free’. Their argument said: the children want (and need) to 
work, and the factory owners want to employ them; what is the problem? 

We don’t have to go back two centuries to see regulations we take for granted that were seriously challenged as 
undermining the free market, when first introduced. When environmental regulations (e.g., regulations on car and 
factory emissions) appeared a few decades ago, they were opposed by many as serious infringements on our freedom to 
choose. Their opponents asked: if people want to drive in more polluting cars or if factories find more polluting 
production methods more profitable, why should the government prevent them from making such choices? Today, most 
people accept these regulations as ‘natural’.

If the same market can be perceived to have varying degrees of freedom by different people, there is really no 
objective way to define how free that market is. In other words, the free market is an illusion. If some markets 
look free, it is only because we so totally accept the regulations that are propping them up that they become 
invisible.

We accept the legitimacy of certain regulations so totally that we don’t see them. More carefully examined, markets 
are revealed to be propped up by rules – and many of them.

To begin with, there is a huge range of restrictions on what can be traded; and not just bans on ‘obvious’ things 
such as narcotic drugs or human organs. Electoral votes, government jobs and legal decisions are not for sale, at 
least openly, in modern economies, although they were in most countries in the past. University places may not 
usually be sold, although in some nations money can buy them – either through (illegally) paying the selectors or 
(legally) donating money to the university.

There are also restrictions on who can participate in markets. Child labour regulation now bans the entry of children
into the labour market. Licences are required for professions that have significant impacts on human life, such as 
medical doctors or lawyers (which may sometimes be issued by professional associations rather than by the government).

Many countries allow only companies with more than a certain amount of capital to set up banks. Even the stock market,
whose under-regulation was the cause of the 2008 global recession, has regulations on who can trade. You can’t just 
turn up in the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) with a bag of shares and sell them. Companies must fulfil listing 
requirements, meeting stringent auditing standards over a certain number of years, before they can offer their shares
for trading. Trading of shares is only conducted by licensed brokers and traders.

Is free trade fair?

We see a regulation when we don’t endorse the moral values behind it. The nineteenth-century high-tariff restriction
on free trade by the US federal government outraged slave-owners, who at the same time saw nothing wrong with trading
people in a free market. To those who believed that people can be owned, banning trade in slaves was objectionable 
in the same way as restricting trade in manufactured goods. 

This clash of values also lies behind the contemporary debate on free trade vs. fair trade. Many Americans believe 
that China is engaged in international trade that may be free but is not fair. In their view, by paying workers 
unacceptably low wages and making them work in inhumane conditions, China competes unfairly.

The Chinese, in turn, can riposte that it is unacceptable that rich countries, while advocating free trade, try to 
impose artificial barriers to China’s exports by attempting to restrict the import of ‘sweatshop’ products. They find
it unjust to be prevented from exploiting the only resource they have in greatest abundance – cheap labour.

Of course, the difficulty here is that there is no objective way to define ‘unacceptably low wages’ or ‘inhumane 
working conditions’. With the huge international gaps that exist in the level of economic development and living 
standards, it is natural that what is a starvation wage in the US is a handsome wage in China (the average being 10 
per cent that of the US) and a fortune in India (the average being 2 per cent that of the US).

Thus seen, the debate about fair trade is essentially about moral values and political decisions, and not economics 
in the usual sense. Even though it is about an economic issue, it is not something economists with their technical 
tool kits are particularly well equipped to rule on.

All this does not mean that we need to take a relativist position and fail to criticize anyone because anything goes. 
We can (and I do) have a view on the  acceptability of prevailing labour standards in China (or any other country, 
for that matter) and try to do something about it, without believing that those who have a different view are wrong 
in some absolute sense. Even though China cannot afford American wages or Swedish working conditions, it certainly 
can improve the wages and the working conditions of its workers. Indeed, many Chinese don’t accept the prevailing 
conditions and demand tougher regulations. But economic theory (at least free-market economics) cannot tell us what 
the ‘right’ wages and working conditions should be in China.

what is a necessary state intervention consistent with free-market capitalism is really a matter of opinion. There 
is no scientifically defined boundary for free market.

If there is nothing sacred about any particular market boundaries that happen to exist, an attempt to change them is
as legitimate as the attempt to defend them. Indeed, the history of capitalism has been a constant struggle over the
boundaries of the market.

A lot of the things that are outside the market today have been removed by political decision, rather than the market
process itself – human beings, government jobs, electoral votes, legal decisions, university places or uncertified 
medicines.

Furthermore, reflecting its political nature, the process of re-drawing the boundaries of the market has sometimes 
been marked by violent conflicts. The Americans fought a civil war over free trade in slaves (although free trade in
goods – or the tariffs issue – was also an important issue). The British government fought the Opium War against 
China to realize a free trade in opium. Regulations on free market in child labour were implemented only because of
the struggles by social reformers.

Recognizing that the boundaries of the market are ambiguous and cannot be determined in an objective way lets us 
realize that economics is not a science like physics or chemistry, but a political exercise. Free-market economists 
may want you to believe that the correct boundaries of the market can be scientifically determined, but this is 
incorrect. If the boundaries of what you are studying cannot be scientifically determined, what you are doing is not
a science.

Thus seen, opposing a new regulation is saying that the status quo, however unjust from some people’s point of view,
should not be changed. Saying that an existing regulation should be abolished is saying that the domain of the market
should be expanded, which means that those who have money should be given more power in that area, as the market is 
run on one-dollar-one-vote principle.

So, when free-market economists say that a certain regulation should not be introduced because it would restrict the
‘freedom’ of a certain market, they are merely expressing a political opinion that they reject the rights that are 
to be defended by the proposed law. Their ideological cloak is to pretend that their politics is not really 
political, but rather is an objective economic truth, while other people’s politics is political. However, they are 
as politically motivated as their opponents.

Thing 2 Companies should not be run in the interest of their owners

what they tell you

Shareholders own companies. Therefore, companies should be run in their interests. It is not simply a moral argument.
The shareholders are not guaranteed any fixed payments, unlike the employees (who have fixed wages), the suppliers 
(who are paid specific prices), the lending banks (who get paid fixed interest rates), and others involved in the 
business. Shareholders’ incomes vary according to the company’s performance, giving them the greatest incentive to 
ensure the company performs well.

If the company goes bankrupt, the shareholders lose everything, whereas other ‘stakeholders’ get at least something.
Thus, shareholders bear the risk that others involved in the company do not, incentivizing them to maximize company 
performance. When you run a company for the shareholders, its profit (what is left after making all fixed payments) 
is maximized, which also maximizes its social contribution.

What they don’t tell you

Shareholders may be the owners of corporations but, as the most mobile of the ‘stakeholders’, they often care the 
least about the long-term future of the company (unless they are so big that they cannot really sell their shares
without seriously disrupting the business). Consequently, shareholders, especially but not exclusively the smaller 
ones, prefer corporate strategies that maximize short-term profits, usually at the cost of long-term investments, and
maximize the dividends from those profits, which even further weakens the long-term prospects of the company by 
reducing the amount of retained profit that can be used for re-investment. Running the company for the shareholders 
often reduces its long-term growth potential.

Karl Marx defends capitalism

You have probably noticed that many company names in the English-speaking world come with the letter L – PLC, LLC, 
Ltd, etc. The letter L in these acronyms stands for ‘limited’, short for ‘limited liability’ – public limited company
(PLC), limited liability company (LLC) or simply limited company (Ltd). Limited liability means that investors in 
the company will lose only what they have invested (their ‘shares’), should it go bankrupt.

However, you may not have realized that the L word, that is, limited liability, is what has made modern capitalism 
possible. Today, this form of organizing a business enterprise is taken for granted, but it wasn’t always like that.

Before the invention of the limited liability company in sixteenth-century Europe – or the joint-stock company, as 
it was known in its early days – businessmen had to risk everything when they started a venture. When I say 
everything, I really mean everything – not just personal property (unlimited liability meant that a failed 
businessman had to sell all his personal properties to repay all the debts) but also personal freedom (they could go
to a debtors’ prison, should they fail to honour their debts). Given this, it is almost a miracle that anyone was 
willing to start a business at all.

Unfortunately, even after the invention of limited liability, it was in practice very difficult to use it until the 
mid nineteenth century – you needed a royal charter in order to set up a limited liability company (or a government 
charter in a republic).

It was believed that those who were managing a limited liability company without owning it 100 per cent would take 
excessive risks, because part of the money they were risking was not their own. At the same time, the non-managing 
investors in a limited liability company would also become less vigilant in monitoring the managers, as their risks 
were capped (at their respective investments).

Therefore, countries typically granted limited liability only to exceptionally large and risky ventures that were 
deemed to be of national interest, such as the Dutch East India Company set up in 1602 (and its arch-rival, the 
British East India Company) and the notorious South Sea Company of Britain, the speculative bubble surrounding which
in 1721 gave limited liability companies a bad name for generations.

By the mid nineteenth century, however, with the emergence of large-scale industries such as railways, steel and 
hemicals, the need for limited liability was felt increasingly acutely. Very few people had a big enough fortune to 
start a steel mill or a railway singlehandedly, so, beginning with Sweden in 1844 and followed by Britain in 1856, 
the countries of Western Europe and North America made limited liability generally available – mostly in the 1860s 
and 70s.

However, the suspicion about limited liability lingered on. Even as late as the late nineteenth century, a few 
decades after the introduction of generalized limited liability, small businessmen in Britain ‘who, being actively 
in charge of a business as well as its owner, sought to limit responsibility for its debts by the device of
incorporation [limited liability]’ were frowned upon, according to an influential history of Western European 
entrepreneurship.

Interestingly, one of the first people who realized the significance of limited liability for the development of 
capitalism was Karl Marx, the supposed arch-enemy of capitalism. Unlike many of his contemporary free-market 
advocates (and Adam Smith before them), who opposed limited liability, Marx understood how it would enable the 
mobilization of large sums of capital that were needed for the newly emerging heavy and chemical industries by 
reducing the risk for individual investors. Writing in 1865, when the stock market was still very much a side-show 
in the capitalist drama, Marx had the foresight to call the joint-stock company ‘capitalist production in its highest
development’. Like his free-market opponents, Marx was aware of, and criticized, the tendency for limited
liability to encourage excessive risk-taking by managers. 

However, Marx considered it to be a side-effect of the huge material progress that this institutional innovation was
about to bring. Of course, in defending the ‘new’ capitalism against its free-market critics, Marx had an ulterior 
motive. He thought the joint-stock company was a ‘point of transition’ to socialism in that it separated ownership 
from management, thereby making it possible to eliminate capitalists (who now do not manage the firm) without 
jeopardizing the material progress that capitalism had achieved.

The death of the capitalist class

Marx’s prediction that a new capitalism based on joint-stock companies would pave the way for socialism has not come
true. However, his prediction that the new institution of generalized limited liability would put the productive 
forces of capitalism on to a new plane proved extremely prescient.

During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries limited liability hugely accelerated capital accumulation
and technological progress. Capitalism was transformed from a system made up of Adam Smith’s pin factories, butchers
and bakers, with at most dozens of employees and managed by a sole owner, into a system of huge corporations hiring 
hundreds or even thousands of employees, including the top managers themselves, with complex organizational 
structures.

Initially, the long-feared managerial incentive problem of limited liability companies – that the managers, playing 
with other people’s money, would take excessive risk – did not seem to matter very much. In the early days of limited
liability, many large firms were managed by a charismatic entrepreneur – such as Henry Ford, Thomas Edison or Andrew
Carnegie – who owned a significant chunk of the company. 

Even though these part-owner-managers could abuse their position and take excessive risk (which they often did), 
there was a limit to that. Owning a large chunk of the company, they were going to hurt themselves if they made an 
overly risky decision. Moreover, many of these part-owner-managers were men of exceptional ability and vision, so 
even their poorly incentivized decisions were often superior to those made by most of those well-incentivized 
full-owner-managers.

However, as time wore on, a new class of professional managers emerged to replace these charismatic entrepreneurs. 
As companies grew in size, it became more and more difficult for anyone to own a significant share of them, although
in some European countries, such as Sweden, the founding families  (or foundations owned by them) hung on as the 
dominant shareholders, thanks to the legal allowance to issue new shares with smaller (typically 10 per cent,
sometimes even 0.1 per cent) voting rights. With these changes, professional managers became the dominant players and
the shareholders became increasingly passive in determining the way in which companies were run.

From the 1930s, the talk was increasingly of the birth of managerial capitalism, where capitalists in the traditional
sense – the ‘captains of industry’, as the Victorians used to call them – had been replaced by career bureaucrats 
(private sector bureaucrats, but bureaucrats nonetheless). There was an increasing worry that these hired managers 
were running the enterprises in their own interests, rather than in the interests of their legal owners, that is, 
the shareholders. When they should be maximizing profits, it was argued, these managers were maximizing sales (to 
maximize the size of the company and thus their own prestige) and their own perks, or, worse, engaged directly in 
prestige projects that add hugely to their egos but little to company profits and thus its value (measured 
essentially by its stock market capitalization).

The holy grail or an unholy alliance?

It was called the principle of shareholder value maximization. It was argued that professional managers should be 
rewarded according to the amount they can give to shareholders. In order to achieve this, it was argued, first 
profits need to be maximized by ruthlessly cutting costs – wage bills, investments, inventories, middle-level 
managers, and so on. Second, the highest possible share of these profits needs to be distributed to the shareholders
– through dividends and share buybacks. In order to encourage managers to behave in this way, the proportion of 
their compensation packages that stock options account for needs to be increased, so that they identify more with 
the interests of the shareholders.

Now, this unholy alliance between the professional managers and the shareholders was all financed by squeezing the 
other stakeholders in the company (which is why it has spread much more slowly to other rich countries where the 
other stakeholders have greater relative strength). Jobs were ruthlessly cut, many workers were fired and re-hired
as non-unionized labour with lower wages and fewer benefits, and wage increases were suppressed (often by relocating
to or outsourcing from low-wage countries, such as China and India – or the threat to do so). The suppliers, and 
their workers, were also squeezed by continued cuts in procurement prices, while the government was pressured into 
lowering corporate tax rates and/or providing more subsidies, with the help of the threat of relocating to 
countries with lower corporate tax rates and/or higher business subsidies.

As a result, income inequality soared (see Thing 13) and in a seemingly endless corporate boom (ending, of course, 
in 2008), the vast majority of the American and the British populations could share in the (apparent) prosperity 
only through borrowing at unprecedented rates.

The immediate income redistribution into profits was bad enough, but the ever-increasing share of profit in national
income since the 1980s has not been translated into higher investments either (see Thing 13). Investment as a share 
of US national output has actually fallen, rather than risen, from 20.5 per cent in the 1980s to 18.7 per cent since
then (1990–2009). It may have been acceptable if this lower investment rate had been compensated for by a more 
efficient use of capital, generating higher growth. However, the growth rate of per capita income in the US fell 
from around 2.6 per cent per year in the 1960s and 70s to 1.6 per cent during 1990–2009, the heyday of shareholder 
capitalism. 

In Britain, where similar changes in corporate behaviour were happening, per capita income growth rates fell from 
2.4 per cent in the 1960s–70s, when the country was allegedly suffering from the ‘British Disease’, to 1.7 per cent 
during 1990–2009. So running companies in the interest of the shareholders does not even benefit the economy in the 
average sense (that is, ignoring the upward income redistribution).

This is not all. The worst thing about shareholder value maximization is that it does not even do the company itself
much good. The easiest way for a company to maximize profit is to reduce expenditure, as increasing revenues is more
difficult – by cutting the wage bill through job cuts and by reducing capital expenditure by minimizing investment. 
Generating higher profit, however, is only the beginning of shareholder value maximization. The maximum proportion 
of the profit thus generated needs to be given to the shareholders in the form of higher dividends. Or the company 
uses part of the profits to buy back its own shares, thereby keeping the share prices up and thus indirectly 
redistributing even more profits to the shareholders (who can realize higher capital gains should they decide to 
sell some of their shares). Share buybacks used to be less than 5 percent of US corporate profits for decades until 
the early 1980s, but have kept rising since then and reached an epic proportion of 90 per cent in 2007 and an absurd
280 per cent in 2008.  William Lazonick, the American business economist, estimates that, had GM not spent the $20.4
billion that it did in share buybacks between 1986 and 2002 and put it in the bank (with a 2.5 per cent after-tax 
annual return), it would have had no problem finding the $35 billion that it needed to stave off bankruptcy in 2009.

And in all this binge of profits, the professional managers benefit enormously too, as they own a lot of shares 
themselves through stock options.

All this damages the long-run prospect of the company. Cutting jobs may increase productivity in the short run, but 
may have negative long-term consequences. Having fewer workers means increased work intensity, which makes workers 
tired and more prone to mistakes, lowering product quality and thus a company’s reputation. More importantly, the 
heightened insecurity, coming from the constant threat of job cuts, discourages workers from investing in acquiring 
company-specific skills, eroding the company’s productive potential. Higher dividends and greater own-share buybacks
reduce retained profits, which are the main sources of corporate investment in the US and other rich capitalist 
countries, and thus reduce investment. The impacts of reduced investment may not be felt in the short run, but in the
long run make a company’s technology backward and threaten its very survival.

But wouldn’t the shareholders care? As owners of the company, don’t they have the most to lose, if their company 
declines in the long run? Isn’t the whole point of someone being an owner of an asset – be it a house, a plot of 
land or a company – that she cares about its long-run productivity? If the owners are letting all this happen, 
defenders of the status quo would argue, it must be because that is what they want, however insane it may look to 
outsiders.

Unfortunately, despite being the legal owners of the company, shareholders are the ones who are least committed 
among the various stakeholders to the long-term viability of the company. This is because they are the ones who can 
exit the company most easily – they just need to sell their shares, if necessary at a slight loss, as long as they 
are smart enough not to stick to a lost cause for too long. In contrast, it is more difficult for other stakeholders,
such as workers and suppliers, to exit the company and find another engagement, because they are likely to have 
accumulated skills and capital equipment (in the case of the suppliers) that are specific to the companies they do 
business with. Therefore, they have a greater stake in the long-run viability of the company than most shareholders.
This is why maximizing shareholder value is bad for the company, as well as the rest of the economy.

The dumbest idea in the world

Limited liability has allowed huge progress in human productive power by enabling the amassing of huge amounts of 
capital, exactly because it has offered shareholders an easy exit, thereby reducing the risk involved in any 
investment. However, at the same time, this very ease of exit is exactly what makes the shareholders unreliable 
guardians of a company’s long-term future.

This is why most rich countries outside the Anglo-American world have tried to reduce the influence of free-floating
shareholders and maintain (or even create) a group of long-term stakeholders (including some shareholders) through 
various formal and informal means. In many countries, the government has held sizeable share ownership in key 
enterprises – either directly (e.g., Renault in France, Volkswagen in Germany) or indirectly through ownership by 
state-owned banks (e.g., France, Korea) – and acted as a stable shareholder.

As mentioned above, countries like Sweden allowed differential voting rights for different classes of shares, which 
enabled the founding families to retain significant control over the corporation while raising additional capital. 
In some countries, there are formal representations by workers, who have a greater long-term orientation than 
floating shareholders, in company management (e.g., the presence of union representatives on company supervisory 
boards in Germany). In Japan, companies have minimized the influence of floating shareholders through 
cross-shareholding among friendly companies. As a result, professional managers and floating shareholders have 
found it much more difficult to form the ‘unholy alliance’ in these countries, even though they too prefer the 
shareholder-value-maximization model, given its obvious benefits to them.

Being heavily influenced, if not totally controlled, by longer-term stakeholders, companies in these countries do 
not as easily sack workers, squeeze suppliers, neglect investment and use profits for dividends and share buybacks 
as American and British companies do. All this means that in the long run they may be more viable than the American 
or the British companies. Just think about the way in which General Motors has squandered its absolute dominance of 
the world car industry and finally gone bankrupt while being on the forefront of shareholder value maximization by 
constantly downsizing and refraining from investment (see Thing 18). The weakness of GM management’s 
short-term-oriented strategy has been apparent at least from the late 1980s, but the strategy continued until its 
bankruptcy in 2009, because it made both the managers and the shareholders happy even while debilitating the company.

Running companies in the interests of floating shareholders is not only inequitable but also inefficient, not just 
for the national economy but also for the company itself. As Jack Welch recently confessed, shareholder value is 
probably the ‘dumbest idea in the world’.

Thing 3 most people in rich countries are paid more than they should be

What they tell you

In a market economy, people are rewarded according to their productivity. Bleeding-heart liberals may find it 
difficult to accept that a Swede gets paid fifty times what an Indian gets paid for the same job, but that is a 
reflection of their relative productivities. Attempts to reduce these differences artificially – for example, by 
introducing minimum wage legislation in India – lead only to unjust and inefficient rewarding of individual talents 
and efforts. Only a free labour market can reward people efficiently and justly.

What they don’t tell you

The wage gaps between rich and poor countries exist not mainly because of differences in individual productivity but
mainly because of immigration control. If there were free migration, most workers in rich countries could be, and 
would be, replaced by workers from poor countries. In other words, wages are largely politically determined. The 
other side of the coin is that poor countries are poor not because of their poor people, many of whom can 
out-compete their counterparts in rich countries, but because of their rich people, most of whom cannot do the same.
This does not, however, mean that the rich in the rich countries can pat their own backs for their individual 
brilliance. Their high productivities are possible only because of the historically inherited collective institutions
on which they stand. We should reject the myth that we all get paid according to our individual worth, if we are to 
build a truly just society.

Drive straight on . . . or dodge the cow (and the rickshaw as well)

A bus driver in New Delhi gets paid around 18 rupees an hour. His equivalent in Stockholm gets paid around 130 kronas, 
which was, as of summer 2009, around 870 rupees. In other words, the Swedish driver gets paid nearly fifty times that
of his Indian equivalent.

Free-market economics tells us that, if something is more expensive than another comparable product, it must be 
because it is better. In other words, in free markets, products (including labour services) get paid what they 
deserve. So, if a Swedish driver – let’s call him Sven – is paid fifty times more than an Indian driver – let’s call
him Ram – it must be because Sven is fifty times more productive as a bus driver than Ram is.

But is this what is really going on? To begin with, is it possible that someone drives fifty times better than 
another? Even if we somehow manage to find a way to measure quantitatively the quality of driving, is this kind of 
productivity gap in driving possible? 

Moreover, if anything, Ram would likely be a much more skilled driver than Sven. Sven may of course be a good driver
by Swedish standards, but has he ever had to dodge a cow in his life, which Ram has to do regularly? Most of the 
time, what is required of Sven is the ability to drive straight (OK, give or take a few evasive manoeuvres to deal 
with drunken drivers on Saturday nights), while Ram has to negotiate his way almost every minute of his driving 
through bullock carts, rickshaws and bicycles stacked three metres high with crates. So, according to free-market 
logic, Ram should be paid more than Sven, not the other way round.

In response, a free-market economist might argue that Sven gets paid more because he has more ‘human capital’, that 
is, skills and knowledge accumulated through education and training. Indeed, it is almost certain that Sven has 
graduated from high school, with twelve years of schooling under his  belt, whereas Ram probably can barely read and
write, having completed only five years of education back in his village in Rajahstan.

However, little of Sven’s additional human capital acquired in his extra seven years of schooling would be relevant 
for bus driving (see Thing 17). He does not need any knowledge of human chromosomes or Sweden’s 1809 war with Russia
in order to drive his bus well. So Sven’s extra human capital cannot explain why he is paid fifty times more than 
Ram is.

The main reason that Sven is paid fifty times more than Ram is, to put it bluntly, protectionism – Swedish workers 
are protected from competition from the workers of India and other poor countries through immigration control. When 
you think about it, there is no reason why all Swedish bus drivers, or for that matter the bulk of the workforce in 
Sweden (and that of any other rich country), could not be replaced by some Indians, Chinese or Ghanaians. Most of 
these foreigners would be happy with a fraction of the wage rates that Swedish workers get paid, while all of them 
would be able to perform the job at least equally well, or even better. And we are not simply talking about 
low-skill workers such as cleaners or street-sweepers.

There are huge numbers of engineers, bankers and computer programmers waiting out there in Shanghai, Nairobi or 
Quito, who can easily replace their counterparts in Stockholm, Linköping and Malmö. However, these workers cannot 
enter the Swedish labour market because they cannot freely migrate to Sweden due to immigration control. As a result,
Swedish workers can command fifty times the wages of Indian workers, despite the fact that many of them do not have 
productivity rates that are higher than those of Indian workers.