chapter 1

1. what is the purpose of the internet? interconnect billions of computing devices throughout the world

2. give a description of the internet based on hardware and software components? hardware description sees the internet made up of communication
links and packet switches

3. what are hosts or end systems? systems in which software runs on

4. what are end systems connected by? communication links and packet switches

5. what differentiates communication links? made up of different physical media

6. what is the transmission rate measured in? bits per second

7. what does a packet switch do? forwards incoming packets to an outbound communication link

8. what are the two most common packet switches in use today? routers and link layer switches

9. where are link layer switches mostly used and where are routers mostly used? link layer switches are mostly used in access networks
whilst routers are used in the core of the network

10. define what a path or a route means? sequence of communication links and packet switches traversed by a packet from the sending end 
system to the receiving end system

11. how do end systems access the internet? via ISPs

12. what are ISP's made up of? network of communication links and packet switches

13. what do end systems, packet switches and other pieces of equipment connected to the internet run? protocols which control the sending and
receiving of infomation

14. what organisation is responsible for creating and maintaining internet standards? IETF 

15. what are the standard documents called? RFC 

16. are there other bodies that specify standards for network components? yes. name one and the type of standard for a component 
it defines? IEEE which specifies standards for network components such as ethernet and WIFI

17. can you describe the internet from services perspective? an infrastructure that provides services to distributed applications i.e. 
applications running on different end systems which need to exchange data with each other via socket interfaces

18. what are the applications in the above definition referred to? distributed applications

19. how does a program running one end system instruct the internet to deliver data to another program running on another end system? via
a socket interface

20. what is the socket interface?  speciefies how a program on one end system instructs the internet infrastructure to deliver data to a 
specific destination program on another end system. also think of it as a set of rules that must be followed for a message to be delivered

21. how is a network protocol similar to a human protocol? entities i.e. computers (instead of humans) exchange messages by following 
a specified set of rules that govern format and order

22. why are end systems called hosts? because they host application programs such as browsers why are they called end systems? because 
they sit at the edge of the internet

23. hosts are further divided into two categories. what are they? clients and servers

24. what is an access network? the network that physically connects an end system to the first router (known as the edge router)

25. name 4 different access networks? DSL, cablem, FTTH, 5G/4G

26. what are the features of DSL an how many frequency groups does it use? typically obtained from telco that provides its wired telephone
access made of twisted copper wire. customer's dsl model uses it to exchange data with the dslam located in the telcos CO. telephone calls
and internet share the same link

27. why are the transmission rates defined by the DSL standards said to be asymmetric? because the dsl standards define multiple transmission
rates (upstream and downstream) which are different

28. are the actual downstream and upstream transmission rates achieved by customers equal to those in DSL standards? nope. why not? because
the telco ISP will purposefully limit the residential rates when tiered service is offered. Max transmission rates are also limited by the
distance between a home and the CO, electrical interference, and gauge of the twisted pair line

29. name two more factors that limits the maximum transmission rate achieved using DSL? listed above

30. what of cable, which company acts as the ISP and what communication mediums are used? cable television acts as ISP and provides it HFC
for use to customers

31. what does HFC stand for and where is it used? hybrid fibre coaxial. how does cable work? cmts serves a similar role to dslam which is
turning analog signal sent from cable modems in downstream homes back into digital format. cable modems divide the network into upstream
and downstream channels which are asymmetric

32. what are the DOCSIS standards? define the transmission rates to be expected when using cable to access the internet

33. what does FTTH stand for and what does it entail? fibre to the home. how does it work? provides fibre path from the CO directly to homes

34. how does FTTH work? central fibre leaves the CO and reaches neighbourhood junction where it is split up into individual homes

35. what are the names of the two technologies that can perform this splitting? active optical networks (AON) and passive optical networks
(PON)

36. in locations where dsl, cable and ftth is hard to reach, how do people connect to the internet? via a satellite link

37. describe dial access method of connecting to the internet? a home modem connects over a telephone line to a modem in the ISP

38. what is the advantage of 5g wireless over other methods of connecting to the internet? does not need the installation of costly
failure prone cabling from telco CO to homes

40. what is the most prevalent LAN technology for connecting end systems to an edge router in corporate settings? ethernet

41. what happens in a wireless LAN setting for a user to connect to the wider internet? a user connects wirelessly to an access point 
(base station) which is in then connected to enterprises network (likely via wired ethernet) which is then connected to the internet.

42. what is wireless LAN technology based on? IEEE 802.11 technology more colloquially known as WIFI

43. what technology do mobile devices use to share photos, videos, stream music etc? same wireless infra used For
cellular telephony to send/receive packets through a base station operated by a cellular network provider

44. what is the difference between the wifi base stations and cellular network provider base stations? a user need 
only be within a few tens of kilometers (as opposed to a few tens of meters) of the base station

45. what are the two categories that physical media (used for bit propagation) fall into? guided and unguided media

46. how do guided media operate? include coax cable, twisted pair coper wire, fibre optic cable; elecctromagnetic waves are guided along a 
solid medium

47. what of unguided mediums, how do they operate? include atmosphere and outer space the waves propagate in the atmosphere or in space 
such as in wireless LAN, digital channel satellite 

48. what are the characteristics of twisted pair copper wires with regards to cost, data rates? cheapest guided medium that has been used in 
telephone networks since they started; a single pair forms a communication link; data rates achieved depend on thickness of wire and distance
between transmitter and receiver; has LAN rates of 10 Mbps to 10 Gbps 

49. what are the charcateristics of coax cables? comprised of copper conductors that are concentric; support bit rates in the hundreds of
Mbps 

50. how do fibre optics work? conducts pulses of light where each pulse represents a bit; immune to electromagnetic interference; very low 
signal attentuation; support bit rates of tens or hundreds of Gbps; preferred long haul guided transmission medium

51. fibre optics are prevalent for long haul guide transmission media, why has they not been adopted for short haul guided transmission 
media? because of the high costs associated with optical devices such as transmitters, receivers and switches

52. what is the name of the standard which outlines the bit rates to be expected of different generation of optical fibre equipment?
the optical carrier standard

53. how do radio channels transmit signals? via the electromagnetic spectrum

54. what factors influence the transmission of a radio channel? propagation environment (interference, signal reflection) and distance over 
which the signal is to be carried

55. what do environmental considerations have an effect on when it comes to terrestrial radio channels? path loss (also known as path 
attentuation; it affects the strength and quality of signals as they propagate through space) and shadow fading which is the fluctuation
in the strength of the signal caused by large scale obstacles obstructing the propagation path between transmitter and the receiver

56. what are the 3 categories of radio channels? those that operate over a short distance (used by wireless headsets), those that operate 
in local areas (used by wireless LAN technologies), those that operate over a wide area (used by cellular networks)

57. how does a satellite radio channel work? links two or more earth based microwave transmitter/receiver, known as ground stations

58. how do the satellites in satellite radio channels work? they receive transmissions on one frequency band and then regenerate the signal
and transmit it on another frequency

59. how do geostationary satellites operate? remain permanently above the same spot on the earth about 36000 kilometres

60. what kind of effect does this type of distance from a ground station to a satellite have? brings about a substantial signal propagation
delay in the milliseconds range

61. what kind of speeds can be supported when satellites are used for internet connections? hundreds of Mbps

62. how do low earth orbiting satellites operate? placed much closer to the earth and do not remain permanently above one spot 

63. how would you define the network core? the mesh of packet switches and links that interconnects the internet end systems

64. in network aplications, end systems exchange messages with each other. what can these messages exchanged contain? might perform a 
control function or may contain data such as jpeg image or an email etc

65. what needs to be happen in order for an source end system to send data to a destination end system? the source needs to break messages 
into smaller chunks known as packets

66. what do packets packets travel through between aa source end system and a destination end system? communication links and packet 
switches

67. what are the two pre dominant types of packet switches? routers and link layer switches

68. at what rate are packets transmitted over each communication link? at a rate equal to the full transmission rate of the link

69. when it comes to packet switches, describe what is store and forward transmission? a packet switch must receive the entire packet 
before it can begin to transmit the first bit of the packet onto the outbound link (it must buffer the packet's bits)

70. what are the two things that each packet switch has? multiple output links attached to it and output buffers for each link which store 
packets that the router is about to send into that link

71. what must a packet do that arrives at a packet switch and finds that the link it is supposed to be transmitted onto is busy sending 
another packet? it must wait in the output buffer of the link

72. what is this phenomenon of waiting called? queuing delay

73. what do these queuing delays depend on? congestion in the network

74. is output buffer space finite or infinite?

75. what happens when a packet arrives at a packet switch and finds that the output buffer of the link it is supposed to be forwaded on is
full? the packet will get dropped or one of the queued packets will be dropped

76. how does a packet switch determine which link to send a packet onto? depends on the computer network; there are several means of 
achieving it

77. how is it implemented on the internet? each packet switch has a forwarding table that maps portions of a hierarchical destination 
addresses to the routers outbound links

78. how do forwarding tables get set? special routing protocols on the internet are used to automtically set the forwarding tables

79. there are two different methods of moving packets through a network of communication links and packet switches, what are they?
circuit switching and packet switching

80. how do circuit switched networks work? the resources needed along a path (buffers, link transmission rate) to provide for 
communication between end systems are reserved for the duration of the communication session between the end systems

81. are the resources reserved in packet switched networks? no, they are used on demand by a session and consequently hosts may have
to wait for access to resources

82. give an example of a network that is circuit switched? telephone network; when a person wants to initiate a phone call to another
person, the network must establish a connection between the two end systems. the switches between the end systems on the path must 
maintain an active connection state during the duration of the call which has a constant transmission rate. this connection is called a 
circuit

83. does the network in question reserve a constant transmission in the networks links (representing a fraction of each links transmission
capacity)?

84. what are the two ways you can implement a circuit in a link? frequency division multiplexing (FDM) or time division multiplexing (TDM)

85. how does FDM work? the frequency spectrum of a link is divided up among the connections established on the link i.e. the link dedicates
a frequency band to each connection for the duration of the connection

86. give two examples of systems that use FDM? telehone networks use a frequency band 4 KHz as the bandwidth; FM radio stations share the 
frequency spectrum between 88 MHz and 108 MHz with each station being allocated a specific frequency band

87. how does TDM work? in a TDM link, time is divided into frames of fixed duration and each frame is divided into a fixed number of time
slots; when the network establishes a connection across a link the network dedicates one time slot in every frame to the connection

88. for systems that use TDM, what is the transmission rate of a circuit? frame rate multiplied by the number of bits in a slot

89. what do critics of packet switching state about it? it is not suitable for real-time services such as video conference calls and phone
calls because of the end-to-end delays inherent in the system

90. what do proponents of packets switching state about the inherent advantages it has over circuit switching? better sharing of transmission
capacity than circuit switching; it is simpler, more efficient and less costly to implement than circuit switching 

91. what are the disadvantages of circuit switched networks? it is wasteful because the resources utilised in dedicated circuits cannot be
shared during silent periods e.g. when one person on the other end of a phone call stops talking; complex signalling software is needed to
establish end to end circuits and reserving end to end transmission capacity 

92. what is a network of networks? where access ISPs which connect end systems and content providers to the internet are interconnected

93. what drives the evolution of the network of networks? economics and national policy rather than performance considerations

94. succintly explain how network structure 1 works? a global ISP interconnects all of the access ISPs; requires the global ISP to have a
router close to all of each and every access ISP; would be very costly to do so; each ISP would be charged in accordance to the amount of
traffic it exchanges with the global ISP where they connect

95. succintly explain how network structure 2 works? two tier hierarchy where multiple global transit providers (tier 1 ISPs) get close to
access ISPs in order to exchange traffic with them. There does not exist a single global ISP which has presence in all the cities in the
world. instead access ISPs connect to regional ISPs which in turn connect to tier 1 ISPs i.e. global transit ISPs

96. succintly explain how network structure 3 works? in addition to multiple competing tier 1 ISPs, there are also multiple competing 
regional ISPs in each region which access ISPs can connect to. Access ISPs can also connect directly to tier 1 ISPs.

97. to build a network that closely resembles the internet we have today, what must we add to the network structure 3? PoPs, multi homing,
peering, and internet exchange points. call this structure network 4

98. what are points of presence? a group of one or more routers at the same location in the provider's network where customer ISPs can 
connect into the providers ISP. they exist at all levels except access ISP level (the lowest tier)

99. for a customer ISP network to connect to a provider ISP, what can it do? lease a high speed link from a third party telecommunication 
provider to directly connect one of its routers to a router at the POP

100. what is multi homing? when an ISP (except a tier 1 ISP) connects to two or more provider ISPs in aa PoP 

101. what is the advantage of multi homing? if one provider ISP goes down due to a failure, the customer ISP can still receive and send 
packets via the other(s) ISPs it is connected to

102. what does the amount that a customer ISP pays a provider ISP depend on? the amount of traffic it exchanges with the provider ISP

103. what do nearby ISPs at the same level do in order to reduce costs relating to using the services of provider ISPs? they peer i.e. 
directly connect their networks together so that traffic between them passes over the direct connection rather than through upstream
provider ISPs

104. what does settlement free mean? when two ISPs at the same level peer their networks then neither will pay the other party

105. what are internet exchange points (IXPs)? a meeting point created by a third party where multiple ISPs can peer together. typically
IXPs are situated in a stand alone building with its own switches

106. why do content provider networks such as google or amazon attempt to bypass tier-1 ISPs (upper tier ISPs) by peering directly 
(settlement free) with many access ISPs or connecting with them at IXPs? to reduce payments to tier-1 ISPs and gain greater control of how 
their services are ultimately delivered to its end users

107. why do content provider networks still need to connect with tier 1 ISPs? because that is the only way they can connect to many access
ISPs

108. why is it impossible for internet services to move large amounts of data between end systems instantaneously? because computer networks
constrain thoughput (amount of data that is transferred per second), introduce delays between end sytems

109. as packet moves from end system to another end system, it suffers from delays. what does this delay comprise of? nodal processing 
delay, queuing delay, transmission delay, and propagtion delay

110. what does processing delay entail? time required to examine a packets header and determine where to direct the packet; can also 
include time needed to check for bit level errors in the packet that occured whilst transmitting them from an upstream node or router

111. what does queuing delay entail? a packet experiences a queuing delay as it waits to be transmitted onto the link

112. what does transmission delay entail? is the amount of time required to push all of a packet's bit onto a link. It is calculatted using
L/R where L bits is the length of packet and R is the transmission rate of a link

113. what is the transmission delay a function of? the length of packet and the transmission rate of a link

114. what does propagation delay entail? time required to propagate from the beginning of the link to the next router

115. what does the propagation speed depend on? the physical medium of the link

116. what is the range of the propagation speed? 2 x 10^8  meters/sec to 3 x 10^8  meters/sec

117. how is the propagation delay calculated? distance between two routers divided by the propagation speed of the link

118. what does the processing delay strongly influence? the maximum throughput i.e. the maximum rate at which a router can forward packets

119. which of the delays is the most complicated and interesting of the nodal delays? queuing delay

120. why? because it can vary from packet to packet i.e. if 10 packets arrive at an empty queue at the same time then the first packet
will have no queuing delay but the last packet will suffer a massive queuing delay

121. when is queuing delay large and when is it insignificant? it depends on the rate at which traffic arrives at the queue, the transmission
rate of the link, and the nature of the traffic i.e. whether it arrives periodically or in bursts

122. summarise the relationship between traffic intensity and queuing delay? as the traffic intensity increases the average queuing 
delay rises sharply in response

