1. what is the main topic of this unit? basic algebra

2. where is the word algebra derived from? from the title of the treatise al-Kitāb al-mukhtasar 
fī hisāb al-jabr wa’l-muqābala (Compendium on alculation by completion and reduction), written 
by the Islamic mathematician Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī in around 825. This treatise deals 
with solving linear and quadratic equations, but it doesn’t use algebra in the modern sense, as 
no letters or other symbols are used to represent numbers.

3. when did modern algebra arise? 1500s and 1600s

4. what are the natural numbers (positive integers)? 1,2,3...

5. what are integers made up of? natural numbers, their negatives and zero

6. where does the word integer come from? it's a latin word that consists of the prefix in, meaning 'not', attached to 
the root of tangere, meaning 'to touch'. so it literally means 'untouched', in the sense 'whole'

7. what are the rational numbers? numbers that can written in the form integer/integer

8. how can you picture real numbers? think of a number line (or real line) extending infinitely in both directions; 
every point on the number line corresponds to a real number and every real number corresponds to a number on the line. 
some points correspond to rational numbers while others correspond to irrational numbers see fig1.png

9. The numbers e and π are two important constants that occur frequently in mathematics.

10. what happens when you express rational numbers as decimal numbers? the result is either terminating or recurring

11. what are the two alternative notations used to denote recurring decimal numbers? see recurring-decimal.png

12. what do you call decimal numbers that neither terminate nor recur i.e. they have infinitely long blocks of digits but 
none that recurs? irrational numbers

13. Figure 3 is a summary of the types of numbers mentioned in this subsection. It illustrates that all the natural numbers 
are also integers, all the integers are also rational numbers, and all the rational numbersare also real numbers.

14. what does BIDMAS stand for?

15. what does it mean to raise a number to a power? means multiply a number by itself a specified number of times

16. In particular, squaring and cubing a number mean raising it to the powers 2 and 3, respectively.

17. do you know what index notation is?

18. what does it mean to take a root of a number? means taking its square root

19. There are various ways to round a number. Sometimes it's appropriate to round to a particular number of decimal places 
(often abbreviated to ‘d.p.’).The decimal places of a number are the positions of the digits to the right of the decimal 
point. 

20. More often, it’s appropriate to round to a particular number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures (often abbreviated to ‘s.f.’ or ‘sig. 
ﬁgs.’).The ﬁrst signiﬁcant ﬁgure of a number is the ﬁrst non-zero digit (from the left), the next signiﬁcant ﬁgure is the 
next digit along (whether zero or not), and so on. see rounding-numbers.png

21. for SI units see SI-units.png

22. meaning of statements b is a multiple a; b is divisible by a; a is a factor or divisor of b

23. meaning of a factor pair of an integer; is a pair of its factors that multiply together
to give the integer. a positive factor pair; square number or a perfect square => same factor pair is 
repeated

24. what do you call an integer greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and itself?

25. what do you call an integer greater than 1 that isn't a prime number? a composite number

26. can you break down any composite number into a product of prime factors? see composite-factorisation

27. what does the fundamental theorem of arithmetic state? every integer greater than 1 can be written 
as a product of prime factors in just one way (order of the factors can change)

28. what is prime factorisation of an integer greater than 1? is any expression that shows the integer 
written as a product of prime factors 

29. what is a common multiple? is a number that is a multiple of two or more numbers

30. what is the lowest common multiple? is the smallest positive integer that is a multiple of two or 
more numbers

31. what is a common factor? is a number that is a factor of two or more integers

32. what is the HCF or GCD? is the largest positive number that is a factor of two or more integers

33. using prime factorisation to find LCM and HCF see finding-lcm-hcf.png and summary-finding-lcm-hcf.png

34. what other method can you use to find LCM and HCF other than prime factorisations? euclids algorithm

35. what is the definition of an expression in mathematics? arrangement of letters, numbers and/or 
mathematical symbols (+, x, etc) which is such that if numbers are substituted for any letters present 
then you can work out the value of the expression

36. what do we call an expression that contans letters (as well as numbers and mathematical symbols)? 
algebraic expression

37. what do we call an expression that only contains numbers and mathematical symbols? numerical 
expression

38. what do we call an expression that’s part of a larger expression, and can be enclosed in brackets 
without aﬀecting the meaning of the larger expression? subexpression

39. Letters representing numbers in algebraic expressions can be any of three diﬀerent types. what are 
they? a variable, an unknown, or a constant

40. give a definition of an equation? made up of two expressions with an equal sign between them

41. If an expression is a list of quantities that are all added or subtracted, then it’s often helpful 
to think of it as a list of quantities that are all added i.e. 5ab - 3b - 4 means the same as 5ab + 
(- 3b) + (- 4). The quantities that are added are called the terms of the expression.

42. if a term has the form, a ﬁxed value × a combination of variables, what is the ﬁxed value called? 
coefficient. For example 5ab has coeﬃcient 5 and is a term in ab;

43. difference of two squares? For any expressions A and B, (A + B)(A − B)= A^2 − B^2 

44. Factors and multiples of algebraic expressions: For example, the equation a^2b = a × ab shows that 
both a and ab are factors of a^2b, and it also shows that a^2b is a multiple of both a and ab. Every 
algebraic expression is both a factor and a multiple of itself. For example, the equation a^2b = 1 × 
a^2b shows that a^2b is both a factor and a multiple of itself.

45. algebraic fractions (simplifying, adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing) see 
algebraic-fractions.png

46. roots of numbers (square, cube, fourth, fifth etc)
47. every positive number has two square roots, a positive one and a negative one
48. every negative number has no real roots
49. the number 0 has one square root - itself
50. for cube root; every real number, whether positive, negative or zero, has exactly one real cube root
51. The situation for fourth roots, sixth roots and all even-numbered roots is similar to that for square roots
52. the situation for ﬁfth roots, seventh roots and all odd-numbered roots is similar to that for cube roots.
53. You ucan use the symbol ‘±’, which means ‘plus or minus’, to write a positive and a negative root together
54. The symbol √ is used to denote the positive square root of a positive real number. 
55. Most roots of numbers are irrational numbers. In particular, the square root of any natural number that isn’t a perfect square is 
irrational. Because numbers like these can’t be written down exactly as fractions or terminating decimals, we often leave them just as they 
are in calculations and in the answers to calculations. 
56. what is an expression such as 1−2√5 called? surd. a surd is a numerical expression that contains one or more irrational roots of 
numbers.
57. surd rules see surds.png
58. if a surd contains an irrational root in the denominator of a fraction what is something you can sometimes do? rewrite the denominator
such that it no longer contains the irrational root. what is this process called? rationalising the denominator
59. how do you rationalise the denominator? multiplying the top and bottom fraction by the surd see rationalising-denominator
60. when it comes to working with powers recognise what the base number is and what the power/exponent/index is see index-laws-1 and
index-laws-2 and index-laws-3
61. see fractional index rules see fractional-index.png Notice that since the notation n√a is deﬁned only when a is positive or zero, 
only positive numbers and zero can be raised to fractional powers. So the notation a^n has no meaning if a is negative and n is not an 
integer.
62. Converting fractional indices to root signs
63. Converting root signs to fractional indices
64. Scientiﬁc notation: One use of indices is in scientiﬁc notation (also known as standard form). This is a way of writing numbers 
that’s particularly helpful when you’re dealing with very large or very small numbers. To express a number in scientiﬁc notation,you write it in the 
form (a number between 1and 10, but notincluding 10) × (an integer power of ten). In computer output, scientiﬁc notation is sometimes represented with 
the power of 10 indicated by the letter E (for exponent). For example, 4.27 × 10^−2 would be represented as 4.27E−2.
65. An equation that is satisﬁed by all possible values of its variables is called an identity. For example, the equation x(x + y) = x^2 + xy
is an identity: it’s true no matter what the values of x and y are.
66. A linear equation is one in which, after you’ve expanded any brackets and cleared any fractions, each term is either a constant term or a constant
value times a variable.
67. Raising both sides of an equation to a power see raising-both-sides.png see raising-both-sides-questions.png solution-to-raising-both-sides
raising-both-sides2 raising-both-sides-questions2 solution-to-raising-both-sides2