Purpose of the lab:

The lab is designed to guide you through the process of designing a data warehouse for a cloud service provider. It focuses on using billing data provided in a CSV file to create a star schema, including the design of fact and dimension tables. This schema will support complex queries related to billing, such as average billing per customer, billing by country, industry, and category, as well as trends over time.

Benefits of Learning the Lab:

By completing this lab, you will acquire practical skills in organizing and analyzing large datasets using data warehousing techniques. These skills are essential for making informed business decisions, optimizing data retrieval, and enhancing the understanding of data relationships. This knowledge is particularly beneficial in real-world scenarios, such as analyzing cloud billing data, where it can lead to more efficient data management and insightful analyses.

Objectives

In this lab you will:

Study the schema of the given csv file
Design the fact tables
Design the dimension tables
Create a star schema using the fact and dimension tables

Exercise 1: Study the schema of the given csv file

In this lab, we will design a data warehouse for a cloud service provider.

The cloud service provider has given us their billing data in the csv file cloud-billing-dataset.csv. This file contains the billing data for the past decade.

Here are the field wise details of the billing data.

Field Name	    Details
customerid	    Id of the customer
category	    Category of the customer. Example: Individual or Company
country	        Country of the customer
industry	    Which domain/industry the customer belongs to. Example: Legal, Engineering
month	        The billed month, stored as YYYY-MM. Example: 2009-01 refers to the month January in the year 2009
billedamount	Amount charged by the cloud services provided for that month in USD

We need to design a data warehouse that can support the queries listed below:

average billing per customer
billing by country
top 10 customers
top 10 countries
billing by industry
billing by category
billing by year
billing by month
billing by quarter
average billing per industry per month
average billing per industry per quarter
average billing per country per quarter
average billing per country per industry per quarter

Here are five rows picked at random from the csv file. see csv-rows.png

Exercise 2: Design the fact tables

The fact in this data is the bill which is generated monthly.

The fields customerid and billedamount are the important fields in the fact table.

We also need a way to identify the additional customer information, other than the id, and date information. So we need fields that refer to the customer and date information in other tables.

The final fact table for the bill would look like this:

Field Name	    Details
billid	        Primary key - Unique identifier for every bill
customerid	    Foreign Key - Id of the customer
monthid	        Foreign Key - Id of the month. We can resolve the billed month info using this
billedamount	Amount charged by the cloud services provided for that month in USD

Exercise 3: Design the dimension tables

There are two dimensions to our fact(monthly bill).

1 Customer information
2 Date information

Let us organize all the fields that give information about the customer into a dimension table.

Field Name	Details
customerid	Primary Key - Id of the customer
category	Category of the customer. Example: Individual or Company
country	    Country of the customer
industry	Which domain/industry the customer belongs to. Example: Legal, Engineering

Let us organize or derive all the fields that give information about the date of the bill.

Field Name	Details
monthid	    Primary Key - Id of the month
year	    Year derived from the month field of the original data. Example: 2010
month	    Month number derived from the month field of the original data. Example: 1, 2, 3
monthname	Month name derived from the month field of the original data. Example: March
quarter	    Quarter number derived from the month field of the original data. Example: 1, 2, 3, 4
quartername	Quarter name derived from the month field of the original data. Example: Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4

Exercise 4: Create a star schema using the fact and dimension tables

Based on the previous two exercises, we have now arrived at 3 tables, we can name them as in the table below.

Table Name	Type	    Details
FactBilling	Fact	    This table contains the billing amount, and the foreign keys to customer and month data
DimCustomer	Dimension	This table contains all the information related the customer
DimMonth	Dimension	This table contains all the information related the month of billing

When we arrange the above tables in Star Schema style, we get a table strucutre that looks likes the one in the image below.

see erd-diagram.png

The image shows the fact and dimension tables along with the relaionships between them.

Exercise 5: Create the schema on the data warehouse

Step 1: Start a postgresql server.

Step 2: Create the database on the data warehouse.

Using the createdb command of the PostgreSQL server, we can directly create the database from the terminal.

Firstly, run the command below to set your PostgreSQL password for authentication. Replace <your_password> with your actual PostgreSQL password, and then execute the command:

export PGPASSWORD=<your_password>

Now, run the command below to create a database named billingDW.

createdb -h 172.21.145.212 -U postgres -p 5432 billingDW

In the above command

-h mentions that the database server is accessible using the hostname “postgres”
-U mentions that we are using the user name postgres to log into the database
-p mentions that the database server is running on port number 5432

Step 3: Download the schema .sql file.

The commands to create the schema are available in the file below.

https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0260EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Working%20with%20Facts%20and%20Dimension%20Tables/star-schema.sql


Download the file by running the command below.

wget https://cf-courses-data.s3.us.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/IBM-DB0260EN-SkillsNetwork/labs/Working%20with%20Facts%20and%20Dimension%20Tables/star-schema.sql

Step 4: Create the schema

Run the command below to create the schema in the under billingDW database.

psql  -h 172.21.145.212 -U postgres -p 5432 billingDW < star-schema.sql
