Scenario

For this project you will assume the role of database administrator at a data analytics consulting company. You have been assigned to a project where you need to setup, test and optimize the data platform.  The platform includes various on-premises database servers like MySQL, PostgreSQL, and an open-source tool such as Datasette, as well as optional cloud-based databases like IBM DB2.  Your job is to configure, tune, secure, backup and monitor those databases and keep them running at peak performance.

This is a three-part assignment.

Part 1: You will work with PostgreSQL server and perform the User Management tasks and handle the backup of the databases.

Part 2: You will work with MySQL server and perform the tasks like configuration check, recovery of data. You will use indexing to improve the database performance. You will identify which storage engines are supported by the server and which table uses which storage engine. Optionally you will also automate backup tasks.

Part 3:  You will be working with an open-source SQLite-based tool, Datasette, or optionally on a cloud instance of an IBM DB2 server, to perform tasks such as data restoration, index creation to enhance query performance, and creating views to simplify query writing.  

Grading Criteria
There are a total of 20 points possible for this final project.  

Your final assignment will be graded by your peers who are also completing this assignment within the same session. Your grade will be based on the following tasks:

Task 1.1 - Find the settings in PostgreSQL (1 pts)

Task 1.2 - Create an User (1 pts)

Task 1.3 - Create a Role (1 pts)

Task 1.4 - Grant privileges to the role (2 pts)

Task 1.5 - Grant role to an user (1 pts)

Task 1.6 - Backup a database on PostgreSQL server (1 pts)

Task 2.2.1 - Restore MySQL server using a previous backup (1 pts)

Task 2.2.2 - Find the table data size (1 pts)

Task 2.3.1 - Baseline query performance (1 pts)

Task 2.3.2 - Create an index. (1 pts)

Task 2.3.3 - Document the improvement in query performance. (1 pts)

Task 2.4.1 - Find supported storage engines (1 pts)

Task 2.4.2 - Find the storage engine of a table (1 pts)

Task 3.1 - Restore the table billing. (2 pts)

Task 3.2 - Create a view named basicbilldetails with the columns customerid, month, billedamount. (1 pts)

Task 3.3 - Baseline query performance. (1 pts)

Task 3.4 - Create an index. (1 pts)

Task 3.5 - Document the improvement in query performance. (1 pts)

see Final Assignment - Database Administration - Part 1

see Final Assignment - Database Administration - Part 2

see Final Assignment - Database Administration - Part 3