chapter 1

1. what is the main topic of this unit? basic algebra
2. where is the word algebra derived from? from the title of the treatise al-Kitāb al-mukhtasar fī hisāb al-jabr wa’l-muqābala 
(Compendium on alculation by completion and reduction), written by the Islamic mathematician Muh.ammad ibn Mūsā 
al-Khwārizmī in around 825. This treatise deals with solving linear and quadratic equations, but it doesn’t use 
algebra in the modern sense, as no letters or other symbols are used to represent numbers.
3. when did modern algebra arise? 1500s and 1600s
4. what are the natural numbers (positive integers)? 1,2,3...
5. what are integers made up of? natural numbers, their negatives and zero
6. where does the word integer come from? it's a latin word that consists of the prefix in, meaning 'not', attached to 
the root of tangere, meaning 'to touch'. so it literally means 'untouched', in the sense 'whole'
7. what are the rational numbers? numbers that can written in the form integer/integer
8. how can you picture real numbers? think of a number line (or real line) extending infinitely in both directions; 
every point on the number line corresponds to a real number and every real number corresponds to a number on the line. 
some points correspond to rational numbers while others correspond to irrational numbers see fig1-chp1.png
9. how do you get the irrational number pi? divide the circumfrence of a circle by its diameter
10. what happens when you express rational numbers as decimal numbers? the result is either terminating or recurring
11. what are the two alternative notations used to denote recurring decimal numbers? see recurring-decimal.png
12. what o you call decimal numbers that neither terminate nor recur i.e. they have infinitely long blocks of digits but none that recurs
13. what does BIDMAS stand for?
14. what does it mean to raise a number to a power? means multiply a number by itself a specified number of times
15. do you know what index notation is?
16. what does it mean to take a root of a number? means taking its square root
17. rounding decimal places
18. rounding significant figures i.e. the first significant figure is the first non zero number from the left
19. When you substitute a negative number into an algebraic expression, you usually have to enclose it inbrackets, to makesurethatyou 
evaluatethe expression correctly
20. meaning of statements b is a multiple a; b is divisible by a; a is a factor or divisor of b
21. meaning of a factor pair; a positive factor pair; square number or a perfect square => same factor pair is repeated
22. what do you call an integer greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and itself?
23. what do you call an integer greater than 1 that isn't a prime number? a composite number
24. can you break down any composite number into a product of prime factors?
25. what does the fundamental theorem of arithmetic state? every integer greater than 1 can be written as a product of prime factors in
just one way (order of the factors can change)
26. what is prime factorisation of an integer greater than 1? is any expression that shows the integer written as a product of prime 
factors 
27. for SI units see SI-units.png
28. what is a common multiple? is a number that is a multiple of two or more numbers
29. what is the lowest common multiple? is the smallest positive integer that is a multiple of two or more numbers
30. what is a common factor? is a number that is a factor of two or more integers
31. what is the HCF or GCD? is the largest positive number that is a factor of two or more integers
32. using prime factorisation to find LCM and HCF see finding-lcm-hcf.png and summary-finding-lcm-hcf.png
33. what other method can you use to find LCM and HCF other than prime factorisations? euclids algorithm
34. what is the definition of an expression in mathematics? arrangement of letters, numbers and/or mathematical symbols (+, x, etc) which is
such that if numbers are substituted for any letters present then you can work out the value of the expression
35. what do we call an expression that contans letters (as well aas numbers and mathematical symbols)? algebraic expression
36. what do we call an expression that only contains numbers and mathematical symbols? numerical expression
37. what do we call an expression that’s part of a larger expression, and can be enclosed in brackets without aﬀecting the meaning of the 
larger expression? subexpression
38. Letters representing numbers in algebraic expressions can be any of three diﬀerent types. what are they? a variable, an unknown, or
a constant
39. give a definition of an equation? made up of two expressions with an equal sign between them
40. who introduced the equal sign to mathematics? robert recorde (welsh mathematician) 
41. If an expression is a list of quantities that are all added or subtracted, then it’s often helpful to think of it as a list of 
quantities that are all added i.e. 5ab - 3b - 4 means the same as 5ab + (- 3b) + (- 4). The quantities that are added are called the terms
of the expression.
42. if a term has the form a ﬁxed value × a combination of variables, what is the ﬁxed value called? coefficient
43. difference of two squares? For any expressions A and B, (A + B)(A − B)= A^2 − B^2 
44. Factors and multiples of algebraic expressions
45. algebraic fractions (simplifying, adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing) see algebraic-fractions.png
46. roots of numbers (square, cube, fourth, fifth etc)
47. every positive number has two square roots, a positive one and a negative one
48. every negative number has no real roots
49. the number 0 has one square root - itself
50. for cube root; every real number, whether positive, negative or zero, has exactly one real cube root
51. The situation for fourth roots, sixth roots and all even-numbered roots is similar to that for square roots
52. the situation for ﬁfth roots, seventh roots and all odd-numbered roots is similar to that for cube roots.
53. You ucan use the symbol ‘±’, which means ‘plus or minus’, to write a positive and a negative root together
54. The symbol √ is used to denote the positive square root of a positive real number. 
55. Most roots of numbers are irrational numbers. In particular, the square root of any natural number that isn’t a perfect square is 
irrational. Because numbers like these can’t be written down exactly as fractions or terminating decimals, we often leave them just as they 
are in calculations and in the answers to calculations. 
56. what is an expression such as 1−2√5 called? surd. a surd is a numerical expression that contains one or more irrational roots of 
numbers.
57. surd rules see surds.png
58. if a surd contains an irrational root in the denominator of a fraction what is something you can sometimes do? rewrite the denominator
such that it no longer contains the irrational root. what is this process called? rationalising the denominator
59. how do you rationalise the denominator? multiplying the top and bottom fraction by the surd see rationalising-denominator
60. when it comes to working with powers recognise what the base number is and what the power/exponent/index is see index-laws-1 and
index-laws-2 and index-laws-3
61. see fractional index rules see fractional-index.png Notice that since the notation n√a is deﬁned only when a is positive or zero, 
only positive numbers and zero can be raised to fractional powers. So the notation a^n has no meaning if a is negative and n is not an 
integer.
62. Converting fractional indices to root signs
63. Converting root signs to fractional indices
64. Scientiﬁc notation: One use of indices is in scientiﬁc notation (also known as standard form). This is a way of writing numbers 
that’s particularly helpful when you’re dealing with very large or very small numbers. To express a number in scientiﬁc notation,you write it in the 
form (a number between 1and 10, but notincluding 10) × (an integer power of ten). In computer output, scientiﬁc notation is sometimes represented with 
the power of 10 indicated by the letter E (for exponent). For example, 4.27 × 10^−2 would be represented as 4.27E−2.
65. An equation that is satisﬁed by all possible values of its variables is called an identity. For example, the equation x(x + y) = x^2 + xy
is an identity: it’s true no matter what the values of x and y are.
66. A linear equation is one in which, after you’ve expanded any brackets and cleared any fractions, each term is either a constant term or a constant
value times a variable.
67. Raising both sides of an equation to a power see raising-both-sides.png see raising-both-sides-questions.png solution-to-raising-both-sides
raising-both-sides2 raising-both-sides-questions2 solution-to-raising-both-sides2